Native interop rewrite (#13462)
flutter/website: sites/docs/src/content/platform-integration/ios/ffigen.md

---
title: "Calling iOS APIs using ffigen"
description: "Learn how to use auto-generated Dart bindings to call native Objective-C iOS APIs directly from your Flutter apps."
---

## Overview

> In traditional Flutter development, calling native iOS platform APIs requires mapping asynchronous message channels (using `MethodChannel`), writing Swift or Objective-C host-side listeners, and manually serializing and deserializing types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In traditional Flutter development,
calling native iOS platform APIs requires mapping asynchronous message channels
(using `MethodChannel`), writing Swift or Objective-C host-side listeners,
and manually serializing and deserializing types.
```

> With direct native interop using `ffigen` (Foreign Function Interface Generation), this process is simplified:
> 1. **Configure**: Write a generation configuration script pointing to the iOS Frameworks or headers you need.
> 2. **Generate**: Run the generation package to analyze native Objective-C classes and compile a type-safe Dart API bridge.
> 3. **Call directly**: Call Objective-C code synchronously and type-safely in your Dart code.
> 
> This tutorial guides you through building a Flutter app called `ios_calendar_demo` that interacts directly with iOS's system `EventKit` framework to fetch and create Calendar events without manually writing any Swift or Objective-C code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With direct native interop using `ffigen` (Foreign Function Interface Generation),
this process is simplified:
1. **Configure**: Write a generation configuration script pointing to the
    iOS frameworks or headers you need.
1. **Generate**: Run the generation package to analyze native Objective-C classes
    and compile a type-safe Dart API bridge.
1. **Call directly**: Call Objective-C code synchronously and type-safely in your Dart code.

This tutorial guides you through building a Flutter app called `ios_calendar_demo`
that interacts directly with iOS's system `EventKit` framework to fetch and create
Calendar events without manually writing any Swift or Objective-C code.
```

---

## Step 1: Create an app and add dependencies

First, create a new Flutter app template focused on the iOS platform.

```sh
flutter create --platforms=ios ios_calendar_demo
cd ios_calendar_demo
```

> Now, add the mandatory runtime bindings package (`objective_c`), the `permission_handler` package to request Calendar access, and the developer-facing generator tool (`ffigen`) as a dev dependency:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, add the mandatory runtime bindings package (`objective_c`),
the `permission_handler` package to request Calendar access,
and the developer-facing generator tool (`ffigen`) as a dev dependency:
```

```sh
flutter pub add objective_c permission_handler
flutter pub add dev:ffigen
```

---

## Step 2: Create the generation config script

> Create a configuration script that details which native classes `ffigen` needs to generate Dart models for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a configuration script that details which native classes `ffigen`
needs to generate Dart models for.
```

> Create a configuration script that details which native classes `ffigen` needs to generate Dart models for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a configuration script that details which native classes `ffigen`
needs to generate Dart models for.
```

Specify `tool/generate_code.dart` at the root of your app directory:

```sh
mkdir -p tool
touch tool/generate_code.dart
```

Add the following configuration code to `tool/generate_code.dart` to target the `EventKit` framework:

```dart
import 'package:ffigen/ffigen.dart';

void main() {
  final config = Config(
    output: Uri.file('lib/eventkit_bindings.dart'),
    language: Language.objc,
    name: 'EventKitWrapper',
    description: 'Bindings for iOS EventKit framework',
    headers: Headers(
      entryPoints: [
        Uri.file(
          '/Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/SDKs/MacOSX.sdk/System/Library/Frameworks/EventKit.framework/Headers/EventKit.h',
        ),
      ],
    ),
    objcInterfaces: ObjCInterfaces(
      include: {
        'EKEventStore',
        'EKEvent',
        'EKCalendar',
        'NSArray',
        'NSDate',
      },
    ),
  );

  final library = FfiGenerator(config).generate();
  library.generateFile(config.output.toFilePath());
}
```

---

## Step 3: Generate the bindings

> Run the generator script. This will parse the `EventKit` headers and generate a type-safe Dart API at `lib/eventkit_bindings.dart` along with an Objective-C wrapper file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the generator script. This parses the `EventKit` headers
and generates a type-safe Dart API at `lib/eventkit_bindings.dart`
along with an Objective-C wrapper file.
```

> Run the generator script. This will parse the `EventKit` headers and generate a type-safe Dart API at `lib/eventkit_bindings.dart` along with an Objective-C wrapper file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the generator script. This parses the `EventKit` headers and
generates a type-safe Dart API at `lib/eventkit_bindings.dart`
along with an Objective-C wrapper file.
```

```sh
dart run tool/generate_code.dart
```

> Because `ffigen` generates an Objective-C wrapper (`lib/eventkit_bindings.dart.m`) to safely map Objective-C blocks and initializers, you need to add it to your Xcode project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `ffigen` generates an Objective-C wrapper (`lib/eventkit_bindings.dart.m`)
to safely map Objective-C blocks and initializers, you need to add it to your Xcode project. 
```

Update your `ios/Runner/Info.plist` to declare calendar usage:

```xml
<key>NSCalendarsFullAccessUsageDescription</key>
<string>We need calendar access to fetch and create events.</string>
```

---

> ## Step 4: Write the Create Event Dialog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 4: Write the create event dialog
```

> To allow users to create events, we need a dialog. Create a new file `lib/create_event_dialog.dart` and add the following code. This code uses standard Flutter Date/Time pickers, and directly invokes the native `EKEventStore.saveEvent` API through our generated bindings!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow users to create events, you need a dialog.
Create a new file, `lib/create_event_dialog.dart`, and add the following code.
This code uses standard Flutter Date/Time pickers,
and directly invokes the native `EKEventStore.saveEvent` API
through the generated bindings.
```

              subtitle: Text('${_startDate.year}-${_startDate.month.toString().padLeft(2, '0')}-${_startDate.day.toString().padLeft(2, '0')} ${_startDate.hour.toString().padLeft(2, '0')}:${_startDate.minute.toString().padLeft(2, '0')}'),
              onTap: () => _selectDateTime(context, true),
              trailing: const Icon(Icons.calendar_today),
            ),
            ListTile(
              contentPadding: EdgeInsets.zero,
              title: const Text('End Date'),
              subtitle: Text('${_endDate.year}-${_endDate.month.toString().padLeft(2, '0')}-${_endDate.day.toString().padLeft(2, '0')} ${_endDate.hour.toString().padLeft(2, '0')}:${_endDate.minute.toString().padLeft(2, '0')}'),
              onTap: () => _selectDateTime(context, false),
              trailing: const Icon(Icons.calendar_today),
            ),
          ],
        ),
      ),
      actions: [
        TextButton(
          onPressed: () => Navigator.of(context).pop(),
          child: const Text('Cancel'),
        ),
        ElevatedButton(
          onPressed: _saveEvent,
          child: const Text('Save'),
        ),
      ],
    );
  }
}
```

---

> ## Step 5: Write the Main App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Write the main app
```

> Now, wire everything together in `lib/main.dart`. We'll request permissions on launch, and provide buttons to Retrieve and Create Events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, wire everything together in `lib/main.dart`.
You'll request permissions on launch,
and provide buttons to Retrieve and Create Events.
```

            ),
            const SizedBox(height: 8),
            Expanded(
              child: _events.isEmpty
                  ? const Center(child: Text('No events to display.'))
                  : SingleChildScrollView(
                      child: DataTable(
                        columns: const [
                          DataColumn(label: Text('Title')),
                          DataColumn(label: Text('Date')),
                          DataColumn(label: Text('Time')),
                        ],
                        rows: _events
                            .map(
                              (event) => DataRow(
                                cells: [
                                  DataCell(Text(event['title'] ?? '')),
                                  DataCell(Text(event['date'] ?? '')),
                                  DataCell(Text(event['time'] ?? '')),
                                ],
                              ),
                            )
                            .toList(),
                      ),
                    ),
            ),
          ],
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
}
```

## Conclusion

> You have successfully built a Flutter application that interacts directly with iOS APIs! By using `ffigen` and `objective_c`, you can skip writing manual message channels and focus on building high quality Dart code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have successfully built a Flutter application that interacts directly with iOS APIs!
By using `ffigen` and `objective_c`, you can skip writing manual message channels
and focus on building high quality Dart code.
```
